[Polkadot Wiki Migration] Using Light Clients (#8)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: develop/application-devs/interact/light-clients.md

---
title: Using Light Clients

> description: Information about light client options in the Polkadot ecosystem, and how they can be used in the development context.

Reviewer: Description has 118 characters. It should be between 120 and 160 characters

---

Conventionally, communication between a user interface (UI) and a node built with the Polkadot SDK is through a JSON RPC
protocol. This is usually done through two main approaches:

> 1. **User Controlled Nodes**: The UI connects to a node client that the user has installed on their machine. These nodes are secure, but installation and maintenance of these nodes tend to be an inconvenience
> 
> 2. **Publicly Accessible Nodes**: The UI connects to a third-party-owned publicly accessible node client. While these nodes are more prevalent in their usage as they are convenient to use, they are centralized and insecure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **User Controlled Nodes** - the UI connects to a node client that the user has installed on their machine. These nodes are secure, but installation and maintenance of these nodes tend to be an inconvenience

2. **Publicly Accessible Nodes** - the UI connects to a third-party-owned publicly accessible node client. While these nodes are more prevalent in their usage as they are convenient to use, they are centralized and insecure
```

With the advent of light clients, applications no longer have to rely on RPC nodes. Light clients don't sync full blocks. Rather, they merely verify the finalized headers of the network. This option provides a cryptographically robust and less resource intensive way to interact with and ensure the state of the network. Light clients are also available locally, embedded as part of the application, enabling a trustless solution to running an RPC node.

<!-- TODO: add def for chain specification when glossary is merged -->

As long as the chain specification for a Polkadot SDK-based network is available, a light client implementation (in or out of the browser) may be used to connect to that network. 

### Light Client Options

> - The [Polkadot API (PAPI)](https://papi.how/){target=_blank} integrates [`smoldot`](https://github.com/smol-dot/smoldot){target=_blank} as a choice of light client for both browser and server based implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [Polkadot API (PAPI)](https://papi.how/){target=\_blank} integrates [`smoldot`](https://github.com/smol-dot/smoldot){target=\_blank} as a choice of light client for both browser and server based implementations
```

> - [Substrate connect](https://substrate.io/substrate-connect/){target=_blank} is a browser extension and JavaScript library that enables developers to build application-specific light clients for Substrate chains. There is no installation required or optional extension with minimal or no maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Substrate connect](https://substrate.io/substrate-connect/){target=\_blank} is a browser extension and JavaScript library that enables developers to build application-specific light clients for Substrate chains. There is no installation required or optional extension with minimal or no maintenance.
```

| Full RPC Node                                                                                        | Light Client                                                                                                         |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Full verification of all blocks of the chain                                                                 | Only verifies the authenticity of blocks of the chain                                                         |
| Holds all the previous block data and the chain's storage in database                                       | No database                                                                                                      |

> | Installation, maintenance, and execution tend to be exhaustive and require system administration expertise. | No need to provision servers or other DevOps related maintenance greatly reduced initialization time from startup. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Installation, maintenance, and execution tend to be exhaustive and require system administration expertise | Eliminates server provisioning and DevOps tasks, drastically reducing startup time |
```

## Resources

> - [What is a light client and why you should care?](https://www.parity.io/blog/what-is-a-light-client/){target=_blank}

Reviewer: This link redirects to the main page of the blog but not to the article

---
title: Using Light Clients
description: Information about light client options available in the Polkadot ecosystem and how they simplify interactions with the network.
---
# Using Light Clients

## Introduction

> Conventionally, applications use a JSON RPC protocol for communication between a user interface (UI) and a Polkadot SDK-built node with one of the following approaches:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Conventionally, applications use a JSON-RPC protocol for communication between a user interface (UI) and a Polkadot SDK-built node with one of the following approaches:
```

> - **User Controlled Nodes** - The UI connects to a node client the user has installed on their machine. These nodes are secure, but installation and maintenance of these nodes tend to be an inconvenience
> 
> - **Publicly Accessible Nodes** - The UI connects to a third-party-owned publicly accessible node client. While these nodes are more prevalent in their usage as they are convenient to use, they are centralized and insecure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **User controlled nodes** - the UI connects to a node client the user has installed on their machine. These nodes are secure, but installation and maintenance of these nodes tend to be an inconvenience

- **Publicly accessible nodes** - the UI connects to a third-party-owned publicly accessible node client. While these nodes are more prevalent in their usage as they are convenient to use, they are centralized and insecure
```

With the advent of light clients, applications no longer have to rely on RPC nodes. Light clients don't sync entire blocks. Instead, they merely verify the finalized network headers. This option provides a cryptographically robust and less resource-intensive way to interact with and ensure the state of the network. Light clients are also available locally and embedded as part of the application, enabling a trustless solution versus running an RPC node.

> <!-- TODO: add def for chain specification when glossary is merged -->
> 
> You can use a light client implementation to connect to a Polkadot SDK-based network, both in and outside the browser, as long as a [chain specification](#) for that network is available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: add link to chain specification when glossary is merged -->
You can use a light client implementation to connect to a Polkadot SDK-based network, both in and outside the browser, as long as a [chain specification]() for that network is available.
```

Lets use empty parenthesis since this is already what is being used in other places in the docs

## Light Client Options

> 

Reviewer 2: I'd like to see an intro sentence before the list items

> - The [Polkadot API (PAPI)](https://papi.how/){target=\_blank} integrates [`smoldot`](https://github.com/smol-dot/smoldot){target=\_blank} as a choice of light client for both browser and server based implementations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [Polkadot API (PAPI)](https://papi.how/){target=\_blank} integrates [`smoldot`](https://github.com/smol-dot/smoldot){target=\_blank} as a choice of light client for both browser and server-based implementations
```

> - [Substrate connect](https://substrate.io/substrate-connect/){target=\_blank} is a browser extension and JavaScript library that enables developers to build application-specific light clients for Substrate chains. There is no installation required or optional extension with minimal or no maintenance.

Reviewer 2: What is being said in the last sentence?

Reviewer 3: It sounds like they are trying to emphasize that you don't have to install anything but, I feel like browser extension already does that.

Reviewer 2: Ok, can you please clean it up?

> - [Substrate connect](https://substrate.io/substrate-connect/){target=\_blank} is a browser extension and JavaScript library that enables developers to build application-specific light clients for Substrate chains. There is no installation required or optional extension with minimal or no maintenance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Substrate Connect](https://substrate.io/substrate-connect/){target=\_blank} is a browser extension and JavaScript library that enables developers to build application-specific light clients for Substrate chains. There is no installation required or optional extension with minimal or no maintenance
```

Also, not sure if we should be linking to the substrate page. I'll ask in TG

Reviewer 2: Yeah, so we should not be linking to the Substrate website. You can link to GH instead: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-connect

## Light Client Benefits

A light client allows for all essential features of the chain, such as fetching data and transferring tokens, but it doesn't store a copy of the entire blockchain or require the trust of remote peers. Light clients fetch the needed data from a node with an associated proof to validate the data.

=== "Full RPC Node"

    Complete verification of all blocks of the chain

    ---

    Holds all the previous block data and the chain's storage in database

    ---

>     Installation, maintenance, and execution tend to be exhaustive and require system administration expertise

Reviewer 2: This feels like it should be a list

Reviewer 3: Keep them inside the tabbed element or take them out?

=== "Light Client"

    Only verifies the authenticity of blocks of the chain

    ---

    No database

    ---

>     No need to provision servers or other DevOps-related maintenance, singificantly reducing initialization time from startup

Reviewer 2: Same comment - should be a list
